README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# maldipickr <a href="https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr"><img src="man/figures/logo.svg" align="right" height="139" alt="maldipickr website" /></a>

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/maldipickr)](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=maldipickr)
[![Project Status: Active – The project has reached a stable, usable
state and is being actively
developed.](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#active)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/github/ClavelLab/maldipickr/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=JQABKDK2MB)](https://app.codecov.io/github/ClavelLab/maldipickr)
<!-- badges: end -->

- Are you using the MALDI-TOF[^1] Biotyper to identify bacterial
  isolates? **Yes**
- Do you want to select representative isolates for further experiments?
  **Yes**
- Do you need fast and automated selection decisions that you can
  retrace? **Yes**

↪ *The [`{maldipickr}`](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr) package
is right for your needs!* The documented and tested R functions will
help you dereplicate MALDI-TOF data and cherry-pick representative
spectra of microbial isolates.

## Quickstart

How to **cherry-pick bacterial isolates** with MALDI Biotyper:

- [using spectra data](#using-spectra-data)
- [using taxonomic identification
  report](#using-taxonomic-identification-report)

### Using spectra data

``` r
library(maldipickr)
# Set up the directory location of your spectra data
spectra_dir <- system.file("toy-species-spectra", package = "maldipickr")

# Import and process the spectra
processed <- spectra_dir %>%
  import_biotyper_spectra() %>%
  process_spectra()

# Delineate spectra clusters using Cosine similarity
#  and cherry-pick one representative spectra.
#  The chosen ones are indicated by `to_pick` column
processed %>%
  list() %>%
  merge_processed_spectra() %>%
  coop::tcosine() %>%
  delineate_with_similarity(threshold = 0.92) %>%
  set_reference_spectra(processed$metadata) %>%
  pick_spectra() %>%
  dplyr::relocate(name, to_pick)
#> # A tibble: 6 × 7
#>   name         to_pick membership cluster_size   SNR peaks is_reference
#>   <chr>        <lgl>        <int>        <int> <dbl> <int> <lgl>       
#> 1 species1_G2  FALSE            1            4  5.09    21 FALSE       
#> 2 species2_E11 FALSE            2            2  5.54    22 FALSE       
#> 3 species2_E12 TRUE             2            2  5.63    23 TRUE        
#> 4 species3_F7  FALSE            1            4  4.89    26 FALSE       
#> 5 species3_F8  TRUE             1            4  5.56    25 TRUE        
#> 6 species3_F9  FALSE            1            4  5.40    25 FALSE
```

### Using taxonomic identification report

``` r
library(maldipickr)
# Import Biotyper CSV report
#  and glimpse at the table
report_tbl <- read_biotyper_report(
  system.file("biotyper_unknown.csv", package = "maldipickr")
)
report_tbl %>%
  dplyr::select(name, bruker_species, bruker_log)
#> # A tibble: 4 × 3
#>   name              bruker_species               bruker_log
#>   <chr>             <chr>                             <dbl>
#> 1 unknown_isolate_1 not reliable identification        1.33
#> 2 unknown_isolate_2 not reliable identification        1.4 
#> 3 unknown_isolate_3 Faecalibacterium prausnitzii       1.96
#> 4 unknown_isolate_4 Faecalibacterium prausnitzii       2.07

# Delineate clusters from the identifications
#   and cherry-pick one representative spectra.
#   The chosen ones are indicated by `to_pick` column
report_tbl %>%
  delineate_with_identification() %>%
  pick_spectra(report_tbl, criteria_column = "bruker_log") %>%
  dplyr::relocate(name, to_pick, bruker_species)
#> Generating clusters from single report
#> # A tibble: 4 × 11
#>   name       to_pick bruker_species membership cluster_size sample_name hit_rank
#>   <chr>      <lgl>   <chr>               <int>        <int> <chr>          <int>
#> 1 unknown_i… TRUE    not reliable …          2            1 <NA>               1
#> 2 unknown_i… TRUE    not reliable …          3            1 <NA>               1
#> 3 unknown_i… FALSE   Faecalibacter…          1            2 <NA>               1
#> 4 unknown_i… TRUE    Faecalibacter…          1            2 <NA>               1
#> # ℹ 4 more variables: bruker_quality <chr>, bruker_taxid <dbl>,
#> #   bruker_hash <chr>, bruker_log <dbl>
```

## Installation

`{maldipickr}` is available on the
[CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/package=maldipickr) and on
[GitHub](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr).

To install the latest CRAN release, use the following command in R:

``` r
install.packages("maldipickr")
```

To install the development version, use the following command in R:

``` r
remotes::install_github("ClavelLab/maldipickr", build_vignettes = TRUE)
```

## Usage

The comprehensive vignettes will walk you through the package functions
and showcase how to:

1.  [Import spectra data and identification reports from Bruker MALDI
    Biotyper into
    R](https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr/articles/import-data-from-bruker-maldi-biotyper.html).
2.  [Process, dereplicate and cherry-pick representative spectra, from
    simple to complex
    design](https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr/articles/dereplicate-bruker-maldi-biotyper-spectra.html).

## Acknowledgments

This R package is developed for spectra data generated by the Bruker
MALDI Biotyper device. The
[`{maldipickr}`](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr) package is
built from a suite of Rmarkdown files using the
[`{fusen}`](https://thinkr-open.github.io/fusen/) package by Rochette S
(2023). It relies on:

1.  the [`{MALDIquant}`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=MALDIquant)
    package from Gibb & Strimmer (2012) for spectra functions
2.  the work of Strejcek et al. (2018) for the dereplication procedure.

### Disclaimer

The developers of this package are part of the [Clavel
Lab](https://www.ukaachen.de/kliniken-institute/institut-fuer-medizinische-mikrobiologie/forschung/ag-clavel/)
and are not affiliated with the company Bruker, therefore this package
is independent of the company and is distributed under the [GPL-3.0
License](https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr/LICENSE.html).

The hexagonal logo was created by Charlie Pauvert and uses the
[Hack](https://sourcefoundry.org/hack/) font and a color palette
generated at <https://coolors.co>.

## References

- Gibb S & Strimmer K (2012). “MALDIquant: a versatile R package for the
  analysis of mass spectrometry data”. *Bioinformatics* 28, 2270-2271.
  <https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts447>.
- Rochette S (2023). “fusen: Build a Package from Rmarkdown Files”.
  <https://thinkr-open.github.io/fusen/>,
  <https://github.com/Thinkr-open/fusen>.
- Strejcek M, Smrhova T, Junkova P & Uhlik O (2018). “Whole-Cell
  MALDI-TOF MS versus 16S rRNA Gene Analysis for Identification and
  Dereplication of Recurrent Bacterial Isolates.” *Frontiers in
  Microbiology* 9 <https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.01294>.

[^1]: Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Time-Of-Flight
    (MALDI-TOF)

Commit message:

illustrate filtering log-score for identification-based delineation
fix #42

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# maldipickr <a href="https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr"><img src="man/figures/logo.svg" align="right" height="139" alt="maldipickr website" /></a>

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/maldipickr)](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=maldipickr)
[![Project Status: Active – The project has reached a stable, usable
state and is being actively
developed.](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#active)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/github/ClavelLab/maldipickr/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=JQABKDK2MB)](https://app.codecov.io/github/ClavelLab/maldipickr)
<!-- badges: end -->

- Are you using the MALDI-TOF[^1] Biotyper to identify bacterial
  isolates? **Yes**
- Do you want to select representative isolates for further experiments?
  **Yes**
- Do you need fast and automated selection decisions that you can
  retrace? **Yes**

↪ *The [`{maldipickr}`](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr) package
is right for your needs!* The documented and tested R functions will
help you dereplicate MALDI-TOF data and cherry-pick representative
spectra of microbial isolates.

## Quickstart

How to **cherry-pick bacterial isolates** with MALDI Biotyper:

- [using spectra data](#using-spectra-data)
- [using taxonomic identification
  report](#using-taxonomic-identification-report)

### Using spectra data

``` r
library(maldipickr)
# Set up the directory location of your spectra data
spectra_dir <- system.file("toy-species-spectra", package = "maldipickr")

# Import and process the spectra
processed <- spectra_dir %>%
  import_biotyper_spectra() %>%
  process_spectra()

# Delineate spectra clusters using Cosine similarity
#  and cherry-pick one representative spectra.
#  The chosen ones are indicated by `to_pick` column
processed %>%
  list() %>%
  merge_processed_spectra() %>%
  coop::tcosine() %>%
  delineate_with_similarity(threshold = 0.92) %>%
  set_reference_spectra(processed$metadata) %>%
  pick_spectra() %>%
  dplyr::relocate(name, to_pick)
#> # A tibble: 6 × 7
#>   name         to_pick membership cluster_size   SNR peaks is_reference
#>   <chr>        <lgl>        <int>        <int> <dbl> <int> <lgl>       
#> 1 species1_G2  FALSE            1            4  5.09    21 FALSE       
#> 2 species2_E11 FALSE            2            2  5.54    22 FALSE       
#> 3 species2_E12 TRUE             2            2  5.63    23 TRUE        
#> 4 species3_F7  FALSE            1            4  4.89    26 FALSE       
#> 5 species3_F8  TRUE             1            4  5.56    25 TRUE        
#> 6 species3_F9  FALSE            1            4  5.40    25 FALSE
```

### Using taxonomic identification report

``` r
library(maldipickr)
# Import Biotyper CSV report
#  and glimpse at the table
report_tbl <- read_biotyper_report(
  system.file("biotyper_unknown.csv", package = "maldipickr")
)
report_tbl %>%
  dplyr::select(name, bruker_species, bruker_log)
#> # A tibble: 4 × 3
#>   name              bruker_species               bruker_log
#>   <chr>             <chr>                             <dbl>
#> 1 unknown_isolate_1 not reliable identification        1.33
#> 2 unknown_isolate_2 not reliable identification        1.4 
#> 3 unknown_isolate_3 Faecalibacterium prausnitzii       1.96
#> 4 unknown_isolate_4 Faecalibacterium prausnitzii       2.07


# Delineate clusters from the identifications after filtering the reliable ones
#   and cherry-pick one representative spectra.
#   The chosen ones are indicated by `to_pick` column
report_tbl <- report_tbl %>%
  dplyr::mutate(
      bruker_species = dplyr::if_else(bruker_log >= 2, bruker_species,
                                      "not reliable identification")
  )
report_tbl %>%
  delineate_with_identification() %>%
  pick_spectra(report_tbl, criteria_column = "bruker_log") %>%
  dplyr::relocate(name, to_pick, bruker_species)
#> Generating clusters from single report
#> # A tibble: 4 × 11
#>   name       to_pick bruker_species membership cluster_size sample_name hit_rank
#>   <chr>      <lgl>   <chr>               <int>        <int> <chr>          <int>
#> 1 unknown_i… TRUE    not reliable …          2            1 <NA>               1
#> 2 unknown_i… TRUE    not reliable …          3            1 <NA>               1
#> 3 unknown_i… TRUE    not reliable …          4            1 <NA>               1
#> 4 unknown_i… TRUE    Faecalibacter…          1            1 <NA>               1
#> # ℹ 4 more variables: bruker_quality <chr>, bruker_taxid <dbl>,
#> #   bruker_hash <chr>, bruker_log <dbl>
```

## Installation

`{maldipickr}` is available on the
[CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/package=maldipickr) and on
[GitHub](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr).

To install the latest CRAN release, use the following command in R:

``` r
install.packages("maldipickr")
```

To install the development version, use the following command in R:

``` r
remotes::install_github("ClavelLab/maldipickr", build_vignettes = TRUE)
```

## Usage

The comprehensive vignettes will walk you through the package functions
and showcase how to:

1.  [Import spectra data and identification reports from Bruker MALDI
    Biotyper into
    R](https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr/articles/import-data-from-bruker-maldi-biotyper.html).
2.  [Process, dereplicate and cherry-pick representative spectra, from
    simple to complex
    design](https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr/articles/dereplicate-bruker-maldi-biotyper-spectra.html).

## Acknowledgments

This R package is developed for spectra data generated by the Bruker
MALDI Biotyper device. The
[`{maldipickr}`](https://github.com/ClavelLab/maldipickr) package is
built from a suite of Rmarkdown files using the
[`{fusen}`](https://thinkr-open.github.io/fusen/) package by Rochette S
(2023). It relies on:

1.  the [`{MALDIquant}`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=MALDIquant)
    package from Gibb & Strimmer (2012) for spectra functions
2.  the work of Strejcek et al. (2018) for the dereplication procedure.

### Disclaimer

The developers of this package are part of the [Clavel
Lab](https://www.ukaachen.de/kliniken-institute/institut-fuer-medizinische-mikrobiologie/forschung/ag-clavel/)
and are not affiliated with the company Bruker, therefore this package
is independent of the company and is distributed under the [GPL-3.0
License](https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr/LICENSE.html).

The hexagonal logo was created by Charlie Pauvert and uses the
[Hack](https://sourcefoundry.org/hack/) font and a color palette
generated at <https://coolors.co>.

## References

- Gibb S & Strimmer K (2012). “MALDIquant: a versatile R package for the
  analysis of mass spectrometry data”. *Bioinformatics* 28, 2270-2271.
  <https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts447>.
- Rochette S (2023). “fusen: Build a Package from Rmarkdown Files”.
  <https://thinkr-open.github.io/fusen/>,
  <https://github.com/Thinkr-open/fusen>.
- Strejcek M, Smrhova T, Junkova P & Uhlik O (2018). “Whole-Cell
  MALDI-TOF MS versus 16S rRNA Gene Analysis for Identification and
  Dereplication of Recurrent Bacterial Isolates.” *Frontiers in
  Microbiology* 9 <https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.01294>.

[^1]: Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Time-Of-Flight
    (MALDI-TOF)
