# Import clusters results generated by SPeDE

Reformat the table output from the analysis of raw Bruker MALDI Biotyper
spectra by the SPeDE tool from Dumolin et al. (2019) to be consistent
with the Strejcek et al. (2018) procedure followed in the
[maldipickr](https://clavellab.github.io/maldipickr/reference/maldipickr-package.md)
package.

## Usage

``` r
import_spede_clusters(path)
```

## Arguments

- path:

  Path to the comma separated table generated by SPeDE

## Value

A tibble with the following columns:

- `name`: a character denoting the spectra name (all spaces, dashes and
  dots are replaced by underscores "\_" in SPeDE)

- `membership`: integers stating the cluster number to which the spectra
  belong to. It starts from 1 to *c*, the total number of clusters.

- `cluster_size`: integers indicating the total number of spectra in the
  corresponding cluster.

- `quality`: a character indicating the spectra quality category by
  SPeDE, out of GREEN, ORANGE and RED.

- `is_reference`: a logical indicating whether the corresponding spectra
  is a reference spectra of the cluster.

## References

Dumolin C, Aerts M, Verheyde B, Schellaert S, Vandamme T, Van Der Jeugt
F, De Canck E, Cnockaert M, Wieme AD, Cleenwerck I, Peiren J, Dawyndt P,
Vandamme P, & Carlier A. (2019). "Introducing SPeDE: High-Throughput
Dereplication and Accurate Determination of Microbial Diversity from
Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption–Ionization Time of Flight Mass
Spectrometry Data". *MSystems* 4(5). <doi:10.1128/msystems.00437-19>.

## See also

<https://github.com/LM-UGent/SPeDE>

## Examples

``` r
# Reformat the output from SPeDE table
# https://github.com/LM-UGent/SPeDE
import_spede_clusters(
  system.file("spede.csv", package = "maldipickr")
)
#> # A tibble: 6 × 5
#>   name         membership cluster_size quality is_reference
#>   <chr>             <dbl>        <int> <chr>   <lgl>       
#> 1 species1_G2           1            1 GREEN   TRUE        
#> 2 species2_E11          2            2 ORANGE  FALSE       
#> 3 species2_E12          2            2 GREEN   TRUE        
#> 4 species3_F7           3            1 GREEN   TRUE        
#> 5 species3_F8           4            2 ORANGE  FALSE       
#> 6 species3_F9           4            2 GREEN   TRUE        
```
